docs: Document scope design and AND semantics (#3267) (#601)
serverpod/serverpod_docs: docs/06-concepts/11-authentication/02-basics.md

## Authorization on endpoints

> Scopes define what an authenticated user is allowed to do. Each scope is an independent capability identified by a string name. Scopes do not inherit from each other — holding `Scope.admin` does not grant any other scope.

Reviewer: Our style guide (STYLE_GUIDE.md) instructs to avoid em dashes in running text (as of 4 days ago, 😄).
See the style guide under "8. Em dashes", for more info.

This goes for the rest of the page, as well.

```suggestion
Scopes define what an authenticated user is allowed to do. Each scope is an independent capability identified by a string name. Scopes do not inherit from each other. Holding `Scope.admin` does not grant any other scope.
```

}
```

> Serverpod ships with `Scope.admin` (named `serverpod.admin`) for built-in admin functionality in Serverpod modules. Define your own scope names for application-specific access control.

Reviewer: Nit: What Scope.admin is named is an implementation detail that adds noise. It can be omitted here.

```suggestion
Serverpod ships with `Scope.admin` for built-in admin functionality in Serverpod modules. Define your own scope names for application-specific access control.
```

:::info

> When `requiredScopes` is non-empty, authentication is required even if `requireLogin` is false. Setting both `requireLogin` and `requiredScopes` has the same effect as scopes alone.

Reviewer: Nit: The second sentence in the info-block restates what the first sentence already told. It can be removed.

```suggestion
When `requiredScopes` is non-empty, authentication is required even if `requireLogin` is false.
```

:::

### How scopes combine

When an endpoint lists multiple scopes in `requiredScopes`, the user must have all of them. Serverpod evaluates scopes with AND logic — there is no OR matching and no scope hierarchy.

Consider a user management feature with two admin endpoints: one for aggregated user analytics and one for editing user data. Not every admin should be able to modify users, so the endpoints require different scope combinations:

```dart
class UserAnalyticsEndpoint extends Endpoint {
  @override
  Set<Scope> get requiredScopes => {Scope.admin};

  Future<UserStats> getStats(Session session) async {
    ...
  }
}

class UserEditEndpoint extends Endpoint {
  @override
  Set<Scope> get requiredScopes => {
    Scope.admin,

>     const Scope('userWrite'),

Reviewer: 1. Custom scopes are introduced in this code example, and below on line 157, before the section "Custom Scopes" which introduces it to the reader.

2. These two examples show creating scopes using a magic string, while the Custom Scopes section teaches the reader to define constants in a class.

Please change the order so Custom Scopes gets introduced first and consider the constant vs magic string examples.

  };

  Future<void> updateUser(Session session, UserData data) async {
    ...
  }
}
```

An admin user with only `Scope.admin` can call `UserAnalyticsEndpoint` but not `UserEditEndpoint`. To allow editing, grant both scopes:

```dart
import 'package:serverpod_auth_idp_server/core.dart';

await AuthServices.instance.authUsers.update(
  session,
  authUserId: authUserId,
  scopes: {Scope.admin, const Scope('userWrite')},
);
```

This lets you compose capabilities at the endpoint level instead of building nested roles.

### Managing scopes

> New users are created without any scopes. Scopes are stored on the auth user and copied into the session or token at sign-in. On each request, the server reads scopes from that token snapshot — not from a live database lookup.

Reviewer: Nit: the reader needs to know the observable behaviour rather than internal mechanics, which is noise.

Perhaps rephrase something like:

```suggestion
New users are created without any scopes. Scope changes take effect only for new sign-ins. Existing sessions and tokens reflect the scopes that were set when the user last signed in.
```

}
```

The user must hold both `userRead` and `userWrite` to access this endpoint. You can reuse the same scope constants across multiple endpoints to build different access combinations.

> Scope names are plain strings stored in the database and embedded in tokens. Keep them stable once deployed.

Reviewer: Nit: Scope names being strings is stated in caution block below. Could be cut the the actionable sentence. Also, the word 'stable', can be clarified further:

```suggestion
Keep scope names stable once deployed, as renaming a scope will revoke it from any user who had it.
```
